# What is mass?

I was getting clicked a few photographs. The photographer asked me, “Give a mass expression?” I stared at him, confused. In my theatre class, I was taught nine emotions - the nava rasa. “Mass” is not one of them. So I asked, “what is a mass expression?” The photographer came close and demonstrated a few poses. At first, he twirled his moustache (which I don’t have enough) and then he flexed his muscles (which he doesn’t have). Then I understood. These so called mass expressions loosely resemble the “Veera” rasa - pride, valour etc. But why did he call it a “mass” expression though? Let’s get to the etymology.

In physics, the word mass means… Sorry you’re not here for a physics class. So I’ll get straight into the cultural aspect of the word mass. 

Simplistic meaning of the word mass is a large group of people. But not every large group of people is called “mass”. There is a judgement factor involved. Generally it is ascribed to the uneducated, unthinking group of people. The group which believes that it thinks calls itself a “class/elite” group to distinguish from the masses. So, Jawan, KGF, Akhanda and the likes belong to mass cinema category watched by unthinking people. Newton, Masaan and the likes are class cinema watched by the thinking lot. That’s what “they” say.

My question still remains - why were the poses demonstrated by my photographer considered mass? Do the ‘thinking people’ not twirl their moustaches and stand tall? Do they not have pride and valour in their lives? 

The answer lies partly in the human tendency to be distinguished from others. For centuries, majority people relied on physical work for livelihood. Flexing muscles is an expression of valour for them. But when the thinking people wanted to distinguish themselves, they started downplaying the expressions of the masses. Possibly its the *sour-grape effect* (a tendency to downplay the value of unattainable goals). My friend at the local writing club once remarked about a co-writer who was being very critical about a mass movie, “She is secretly going to enjoy the movie watching it on OTT. But she finds it beneath her identity to accept that in public.” He’s right, probably. I liked the movie.

But again, why did my photographer only twirl his moustache to demonstrate a mass expression? He could have shown me a mass love emotion as well. Is the Veera/Valour expression the only one chosen by the thinking people to distinguish themselves from masses?

Seems like it. Out of all the 9 rasas, Veera rasa seems to be the one that’s used more to be distinguished. There are for sure mass vs class divisions in love (DDLJ vs Lunchbox), comedy (Golmaal vs Herapheri) etc., but Veera seems to dominate. So much so that in Rajasthan last year, [Jitendrapal Meghwal, a Dalit, was murdered for sporting a moustache](https://www.opindia.com/2022/03/rajasthan-dalit-man-jitendrapal-meghwal-killed-for-his-stylish-moustache/) (and possibly twirling it?) The upper caste among the unthinking masses appropriated the moustache (and its twirling). “*How dare he cross the line that distinguishes the upper and the lower caste?*” - the murderer possibly thought. He wouldn’t have been that troubled had Meghwal loved or cracked a joke in ‘upper caste’ ways. But Veera, not allowed.

And with that, the churning of my neurons stopped. And I’ll continue to enjoy mass cinema. I’m not saying every mass movie is good. I liked KGF but disliked WAR. I liked Bhagvanth Kesari but abhorred Veera Simha Reddy. It’s just that I found the Veera rasa in these movies more purposeful. And that’s the key - purpose.